.. NXRefine documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Wed Oct 11 14:36:33 2023.

NXRefine
========
.. figure:: /images/nxrefine-index-image.png
   :align: right
   :width: 100%
   :figwidth: 40%

Recent advances in synchrotron x-ray instrumentation have enabled the
rapid acquisition of x-ray diffraction data from single crystals,
allowing large contiguous volumes of scattering in reciprocal space to
be collected in a matter of minutes. Typically, the sample is rotated
continuously in a monochromatic beam while images are collected on a
fast area detector. These images are stacked into three-dimensional
arrays and transformed from detector coordinates to reciprocal space
coordinates, using an orientation matrix derived from the measured
Bragg peaks.

*NXRefine* implements a complete workflow for both data acquisition and
reduction of single crystal x-ray scattering. Workflows developed for
crystallography typically have the goal of generating Bragg peak
intensities used to determine the average crystalline structure, but the
goal of *NXRefine* is to produce a three-dimensional mesh of scattering
intensity in reciprocal space that includes both Bragg peaks *and* the
diffuse scattering that arises from deviations from the average
structure. The workflow also generates three-dimensional
pair-distribution-function maps (PDFs), both total PDF and 3D-Î”PDF, to
determine interatomic vector probabilities in real space.

The workflow is written as a set of Python modules that can either be
run from the command line, launched from a GUI that is implemented as a
plugin to `NeXpy <https://nexpy.github.io.nexpy/>`_, or by submitting
jobs to a batch queue. After the initial refinement of the sample
orientation, the entire workflow can be run in an automated fashion,
while the data is being collected so that reduced data is available for
inspection before a set of measurements, *e.g.*, as a function of
temperature, are complete.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   introduction
   installation
   experiment
   sample
   reduction
   server
   glossary

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
